welcome to topcast this is a reaction
video reaction podcast 2 a Making Sense
episode that came out just recently in
fact it's the latest one if you happen
to be watching this in around on or
around the 15th of July 2022. I like
listening to Sam Harris in the making
sense podcast some of the guests are
absolutely fantastic at times there are
certain themes that run throughout the
podcast and it's a good way to take the
temperature so to speak of the
intellectual Zeitgeist at times I'd like
to begin in today's episode with well
it's an unusual episode to begin with in
an unusual way I've got here my scripts
to these original Star Wars Trilogy and
there is a point at which uh Luke
Skywalker the hero is meeting with
Master Yoda on Dagobah the Dagobah
system on the planet there where Yoda
happens to be living and uh Luke of
course is learning how to use the force
the force I like to think of the force
in our optimistic World realistic
worldview as simply creativity or
explanatory knowledge that's what the
force kind of is that's the superpower
that we have anyway at one point Yoda is
training Luke in the use of the force
and he's Luke is coming to be able to
levitate stones and while he's learning
to do this his ship that has crash
landed on the planet sinks into the
swamp
and what happens then well let's just
read read what is said here
uh the ship has just sunk into the swamp
and Luke says oh no we'll never get it
out now Yoda says so certain are you
always with you it cannot be done hear
you nothing that I say
Luke says master moving Stones around is
one thing this is totally different and
Yoda says no no different only different
in your mind you must unlearn what you
have learned
end quote and that's fantastic only
different in your mind this is exactly
right that we are able to solve problems
in our environment all the time the
little things in our day-to-day lives
the only difference between the little
things we do in our day-to-day lives the
things we're able to solve right now uh
a matter of scale a matter of
quantitative difference not qualitative
difference that if the asteroid is
heading towards us the right knowledge
created in time will be able to help us
avoid the catastrophe that would
otherwise happen from a collision of
asteroid with the Earth would be able to
deflect the asteroid or something and I
like to use the asteroid as a metaphor
for absolutely any other problem
absolutely any other problem if it's a
problem it can be solved there will be a
solution because problems are soluble
Yoda is The Optimist Luke is the
pessimist and as an optimist you
sometimes feel in the role of Yoda hear
you nothing that I say
times so today I'm taking a walk it's a
beautiful sunny day outside in Sydney
today and as I do I listen to podcasts
audio books and things I listen to the
latest uh chapter of the fabric of
reality for uh the next episode of
topcast on the fabric of reality which
is about justificationism and once I got
to the end of that I'll listen to some
comedy podcasts and I thought well I'll
listen to Sam's latest one and the this
episode caught my attention of course
what we do here a lot at topcast at my
podcast is explore the clash between the
dominant intellectual culture which is
absolutely well for one of another word
Infested by pessimism and the very very
small number of people who are pushing
against that in an optimistic way saying
that problems are soluble yes they exist
they are inevitable after all but people
are the solution people are not the
problem people are the solution and we
can solve those problems and we do do
solve those problems Pinker has written
eloquently about how we have solved
those problems and Pinker is one of
those people who forms part of that
Minority of people who try to push back
against some of the pessimism but even
within this spectrum of Optimus smaller
number though they are and even smaller
percentage I think really appreciate
exactly what the mechanisms are and why
it is we can continue to be optimistic
and why any particular blip of so-called
pessimism or steps backward actually
won't last
anyway all of that aside
um this Making Sense episode this
episode of Sam Harris's it's worth
concentrating on what I'm going to do is
just to speak to the introductory
remarks that Sam makes to the episode
and then to his guests introduction as
well uh I listened to the whole episode
but I can't go through a point for Point
refutation of every single thing that is
said there so much of it is simply
prophecy and as we know prophecy tends
towards pessimism that once you get into
the particulars of trying to for example
say what's going to happen to China over
the next few decades or say what's going
to happen to America over the next few
decades or that as the point is made for
rather laborious Point made about how
America's Naval power isn't sufficient
to protect trade routes around the world
and therefore this is going to lead to
catastrophic decline of global trade
over the coming decades these kind of
very specific points well I don't know
how any of it follows it's kind of an
induction type argument which doesn't
exist there it's not valid it's merely
guessing at the future it's taking out a
crystal ball and as we know when people
do this when intellectuals do this they
can foresee all of the problems they do
not foresee the solutions anyway the
name of the episode number 288 from
making sense is the end of the global
order and Sam's been talking about this
end of the global order a lot recently
now there's a sense in which maybe it's
just well things change over time so
maybe it's good that there's an end to
whatever the existing thing is so that
something better again comes along
perhaps more freedom more Liberty more
capitalism more creativity all of that
good stuff of course that's not what I
understand trying to say that's not what
his guests are hinting at we're not
going to hear from one of the guests
we'll hear from Sam and the author of
the book that is being discussed there
is another guest on the podcast as well
who tries to serve as a foil a sort of a
counter to the Deep pessimism of the
main guest but really it's just two
pessimists finding it out over who was
more pessimistic and so the purpose of
the episode is and I'm just reading from
Sam's own description of the podcast is
he's speaking with Peter zehan and Ian
bremmer about Peter Peter zehan's new
book the end of the world is just the
beginning so you can see why I would be
attracted to something like this now
it's not because I like to just
continually talk about pessimism and
prophecy and the end of the world
but it is important to know what the
common thoughts are that are out there
the common misconceptions I would say
that that exist out there about how
although things have tended to get
better although many people of course
disagree with that but that assumption
you know there are many people in the
intellectual Community who think that no
there is no evidence of things getting
better okay they're denying reality
there
but of those who do admit that there's a
reality to that statement there's truth
to that that in fact things have gotten
better I'll ask Stephen pinker's writing
on this David Deutsch's work of course
on this as well
that will nonetheless say that we're at
a uniquely dangerous point and all signs
are pointing towards Global decline
that that now now the malthusians are
going to be right that now the sky is
going to fall that now the global order
is going to end and we're all going to
be in poverty and there's going to be a
third world war and things are just
going to get worse and worse and worse
that now we're going to be right namely
the pessimists are going to be proved
correct so I had this bizarre experience
anyway today walking outside in the
bright sunshine sunshine as I say
um listening to this podcast Sam begins
uh is about five minutes of um uh just
explaining the great things that are
done on the waking up app and
advertising the the podcast more broadly
all that before he gets into actually
before he gets into uh actually
introducing uh the the episode the
episode proper and as soon as he begins
doing this although it's all very
serious and it's about the end of the
global order
um I just began laughing out loud so I'm
looking talking like a crazy person
walking along the street just laughing
out loud in a way I hadn't been laughing
at Conan O'Brien's podcast which I've
just been listening to which was
hilarious but I was really laughing out
loud at Sam Harris's stuff now no
disrespect to Sam it's just the contrast
between the things I normally talk about
and the way I normally talk about them
and the kind of themes that run through
just everything I talk about on topcast
the things that I have talked about with
Navara avocado the things that David
Deutsch has written about so this is
what my mind is typically filled with
okay those kind of ideas and so when I
encounter the precise opposite to these
things it's so jarring that you laugh
well I laugh anyway and so it's just the
whole other world view comes in comes
screaming into view and I'm knocked out
of my optimistic Slumber so to speak and
I have to remember I I know in an
intellectual level that this this is the
way that the overwhelming majority of
intellectuals really do think and this
is what therefore people who tend to
listen to podcasts like this this is
what they're being fed and this is what
people think this is what people really
do think and this is the way this is
what motivates the way people vote this
is what motivates the way people
purchase stuff what they invest in all
of this kind of stuff is motivated by a
particular ideology a particular
philosophy in particular about Decline
and Americans if nothing else an entire
side of politics over there seems to be
motivated largely by denigrating America
itself there's an anti-American streak
unique to the United States perhaps it
comes in part from the philosophies of
Continental Europe and where there is
this is very anti-nation State very
anti-freedom all that sort of stuff that
comes out of Europe and and the United
States inherits part of that at least
one side of politics of their inherits
part of that one side of politics there
tends more in the direction of the
British tradition of the Enlightenment
so they tend to be more optimistic it's
not a strict split but you take my
meaning let's not get on to politics
however but it is it is interesting just
to observe this kind of way of speaking
about their own exceptional nation that
exists there in the United States and I
know uh a majority of my audience is
from the United States perhaps living
there for so long people just don't
realize how special it is now of course
there are people who visit the United
States from Europe who still insists
that it's not a particularly special
place but we know it is it is unique on
the face of the planet it is unique on
the face of the planet right now in
terms of its wealth and power in terms
of innovation it continues that
tradition that began in Britain in a
spread throughout the anglosphere and
Enlightenment Nations more broadly even
in Europe and even across parts of Asia
as well Innovation is something the
United States does still I would say
better than just about anywhere else in
the world with maybe a few exceptions in
other parts of the world at times at
times so some of us struggle to
understand why it is Americans are so
Keen to talk down their own exceptional
country their own exceptional Nation
then again Australians do it as well and
the British are very very good at this
this is something anglosphere nations
are good at the people of Nations that
speak English are very very good at is
talking down their own exceptional
Nations to what extent Asian countries
do this I don't know I've heard that you
know the places like Spain for example
will talk down their country while
they're in it but if they travel outside
then they'll talk it up okay so there is
that interesting cultural difference as
well I don't know if the I don't know if
English-speaking peoples tend to do this
maybe they do whatever the case let's
get on to listening to the first
approximately just 10 minutes or so just
10 minutes of this Making Sense episode
again just going to listen to Sam's
introduction to the episode and then to
to Peter his guest introduced his book
and then that'll be it okay but I'm
going to be pausing it along the way and
I would encourage you of course to
listen to the episode in Full well worth
listening to to get the other side of
the argument especially for the things
I'm going to say here and again full
respect to the people that I um am
inevitably going
to laugh at some of what is said here
okay but um only in good fun I think we
need to have good fun with this because
I think that
the what I'm laughing at is the by as I
say the most common intellectual opinion
that's out there right now so they
shouldn't be worried about you know
someone with a tiny little podcast like
mine laughing at them okay let's begin
today we're talking about the end of the
world as we know it
so there we go there we go um straight
away you know no no Hedges nothing like
that we're straight into talking about
the end of the world as we know it now
as I say there could be an optimistic
sense in which this can be interpreted
the end of the world as we know it so
that it ushers in an even better world
of more freedom more trade greater
creativity faster solution to our
problems increased rate of progress all
of that great stuff that could be the
end of the world as we know in fact
every single new day could be an end of
the world as we know it
of course this is what not what people
mean this is not what the pessimists
mean yeah you know ever since you know I
sort of grew up in the 80s we often
heard the phrase end of the world as we
know it you know REM did that song the
end of the world as we know you know so
this whole idea that nuclear war could
take us out and now of course we've got
the long list of different ways in which
we might all die okay so the end of the
world as we know it let's keep going
that really is not much of an
exaggeration
because today I'm speaking with Peter
Zion and Ian bremmer
and we're focusing on Peter's new book
titled the end of the world is just the
beginning
which is a fairly dire look at the
implications of deglobalization
and demographic collapse as I say at the
beginning I invited Ian to help co-host
this episode essentially because so much
of what Peter has written about is just
not in my wheelhouse
so I invited Ian to ride shotgun with me
which happily he did uh and I thought it
was a great conversation
we tracked through a lot of what's in
Peter's book
why deglobalization is happening
why he's so confident that it will
continue to happen
how it has different implications for
countries like China versus countries
like America
so this idea that D globalization is
happening so whether or not that's true
is who something we could grapple with
there can be blips in things like well
the Ukraine war that's happening as of
2022.
a sign of something far more Broad
are these kind of things the sign of
something more broad I I I get
deliveries from Amazon almost on The
Daily
is that a sign of the decline of
globalism ever since the 2000s and where
the the internet age has really taken
off it doesn't seem to me like progress
is slowed it doesn't seem to me like
globalism is in Decline whatever these
metrics are people can pick any metric
they like and focus on that and to say
well haha that is the sign of a decline
in globalism this is a this is the
demographic change whatever these signs
happen to be
that's one thing we can debate whether
or not these particular metrics
picked selected carefully in order to
make a point we're not talking about all
of the different metrics and all of the
different ways in which we could talk
about how things are getting better and
how globalization is increasing not
decreasing
putting all of that aside even if we
could agree that these are the metrics
that indicate Global globalization
decline something like that a reduction
in global trade
that is absolutely no reason to presume
that such a pattern is going to continue
that's predicting stock markets that's
predicting the choices of people that's
predicting knowledge creation that's
induction it's completely invalid it's
not a thing
the past does not resemble the future we
know this
we we have this trend in the stock
market that tends to go up but there are
these down bits as well that that just
happen
why because the world's unpredictable we
encounter problems that can't be seen
ahead of time and so when those problems
are encountered whether they be War
viruses
poor responses to viruses from
politicians that cause a reduction in
global trade and a retreat behind
National lines the election of
particularly poor political leaders
these things are the blips that cause
the downs but there is but but
politicians can only do so much damage
is my thought
bad political decisions can only achieve
so much
the tend towards socialism in this day
and age can only undo so much progress
people are coming to understand that
individual Freedom wealth creation
really are able to cause the up uh part
of that graph when when you're talking
about the increase in overall wealth
Health well-being the the the the the
robust performance of the stock market
that kind of thing but in particular
individual and Global wealth is
increasing absolutely increasing the
number of people starving in various
places around the world has continued to
decrease
their wealth has continued to increase
the the poorest people in the world
among the poorest people in the world I
should say among the poorest people in
the world have access to the internet
via smartphones Wireless technology that
will continue a pace and there are
simply it's simply not the case
modulo bad decisions of politicians in
particular countries
that people are going without food
Medical Care clean water that kind of
thing yes there are still Pockets where
that is true but since the 80s when
there really were huge famines going on
in places like Ethiopia where violence
was far more pervasive than it is today
these things are the exception to the
rule Ukraine the war in Ukraine is just
so noticeable because it's so unusual
so unusual a few decades ago that would
have been regarded as a small Skirmish
and the greater scheme of things when it
came to something like the Second World
War
and compared to something like in the
90s the war in Iraq my goodness the war
in Ukraine is terrible as it is
not on that scale simply not on that
scale as I record this episode there are
political eruptions in Sri Lanka okay
exception to the rule exception to the
rule of
the majority of the world is made up of
Nations that are very stable and
prospering prospering
as I record this there has been a huge
amount of inflation in places why well
shouldn't one expect that after forcing
people to stay at home during a global
pandemic that was apparently the only
option the pandemic could have been far
worse than what it was it could have
been a more virulent strain and all that
sort of stuff
and things could have been worse
they were pretty bad
people were kept at home productivity
was reduced the government stepped in
and started paying people for doing
nothing for staying at home so of course
there's inflation because the government
of the world were printing money
in particular in the United States
and so you have this huge inflation
going on that's what happens when you
print money that's what happens we know
that now all we need is for the
politicians to make some different
decisions now whether and how quickly
that happens who knows but we have every
reason to think that productivity is not
going to go down to continue to go down
people understand now despite what the
media says despite the scare memory then
continue that continues that things will
continue to get better
that we have vaccines now for example so
people can work and people can work from
home also very importantly that's what
it's something that's been figured out
that so much of what was being done from
offices can now be done at home and
perhaps more efficiently and better than
ever before people realize that so much
can be delivered to their homes now
rather than having to go to stores
there's all ways in which you know the
covert was absolutely a bad thing but
out of that came new Solutions
creativity to push progress forward so
we can pick and choose our data here or
data our evidence
and paint a picture of a world going to
rock and roll as the prophets have
always done as the pessimists have
always done
and us optimists can also be accused of
it picking and choosing our data but the
thing is that
whether we pick and choose our data
there can nothing can be we cannot deny
the fact that things have continued to
get better broadly speaking that
wherever there are these particular
declines in wealth and well-being that
overall the broad Trend Trend over
centuries
and especially recent decades is
accelerating progress and Improvement
across yes the Western countries but the
entire world people being lifted out of
poverty this is a story of Happiness
progress prosperity
increased wealth increased peace you
really have to do some work to deny all
that and to say that all of these are
indications of things becoming worse and
that things will become worse in some
way shape or form
maybe it's that the pessimists think
that the the global warming catastrophe
isn't cutting it anymore that we need to
if we're going to compel people to vote
for socialist type policies then if if
covert wasn't enough
if environmentalism isn't enough then
we're going to have to hit them with the
end of the global World Order maybe then
they'll come around maybe then they'll
start voting the correct way and start
thinking the way that we do
well hopefully not let's continue let's
continue
and as you'll hear there are not too
many countries like America in his
estimation
and there's a long discussion on the
implications of demography and
demographic collapse
and just what is the relationship
between labor and consumption and
investment
and urbanization what does the world
look like with shrinking populations as
you'll hear it is a bracing and fairly
alarming picture of guaranteed disorder
and scarcity
guaranteed disorder and scarce
guaranteed
declining populations now I hear about
this all the time Elon Musk is worried
about this amongst other things
I'm not worried about declining
populations you know
um people are creative entities that the
great concern is that if you've got this
these older people
who can't be supported in their old age
because they're useless and can't work
this is literally the the argument right
these old people won't be working
they'll be unproductive and they'll have
to be supported by a younger generation
but there's not enough of the younger
generation to support them really is
this what we think of our elderly people
is it is this really what we think we're
thinking of them as a burden
is that what we're going to say about
people human beings creative human
beings
it's wrong to start with okay but older
people can absolutely contribute and
more and more every single year we see
older people remaining in the workforce
we are Minds not bodies our bodies can
Decay and our medicine is becoming
better and our technology has become
better anyway to make these older people
more robust as they age that's one thing
our technology is going to be at a point
where so much of what we do is automated
these concerns that people have that oh
there's not going to be enough young
people to support the old people in old
age and therefore we've got this problem
with population Decline and
by the way we can also add into this if
the artificial intelligence people are
right and artificial general
intelligence around the corner of course
I don't think this but I do think
artificial general intelligence is
possible then we'll have a new kind of
person won't we the robotic kind of
person that'll solve all those problems
anyway it's not guaranteed at all what
Sam and Peter cannot foresee and Elon
cannot foresee is infinite I can't
foresee it either but what I do know is
the people that exist today are as
creative as we ever have been more so
perhaps because we're less encumbered by
anti-rational means so we're thinking
more creatively not less so in this this
entire concern and therefore pessimism
about the future is completely misplaced
ethylene is placed and and depends upon
us thinking that the distant future
occupied by a large population of older
people in a smaller population of
younger people is basically going to be
the same as today
where we need to have these welfare
programs of older people being
unproductive and getting paid by the
state using money
produced by a wealth produced by the
younger people
and by the way maybe that is possible
let's assume that the worst terrible
case scenario does come true
maybe the rate of knowledge production
will be just so great that will be a
possible situation in which for us all
to live we'll have the robots and so on
to do the caring of those older people
at almost zero cost if we have fusion
power then these robots can be plugged
into the fusion reactors charged up by
super efficient lithium batteries of the
future this won't be a problem
it will have been solved
there'll be a solution
they're worrying now about problems of
the far distant future and how we're
going to solve those in the future now
useless Focus now on the problem on the
problems now that's not a problem now
and insofar as it is a problem somewhere
now like Japan they happen to be solving
it
look into that
and they also have this nice culture of
looking after their older people as well
which we could probably learn from in
the west I would say
okay so this claim that uh there's a
guarantee a guarantee of things going
badly is completely wrong
utterly wrong it's not based upon a good
explanation it's based upon a
misconception about how knowledge is
created and how extrapolations can be
made generalizations are produced it's
assuming that one can use this thing
called induction that the past resembles
the future and yet the past does not
resemble the future we absolutely know
that
okay let's go to the next clip and uh
there's also some discussion about the
significance of the war in Ukraine and
and other recent developments there
anyway I found it fascinating
I hope you enjoy it Peter Zion is a
geopolitical strategist and founder of
the consulting firm Zion on geopolitics
his clients include energy corporations
financial institutions business
associations agricultural interests
universities and the US Military
people will have every right to make a
quid
earn money
uh generate wealth personal wealth for
themselves
if we are in an age where
absolutely
saying how things are going to go
terribly
and I'm the person who can tell you
what's going to go badly and how you can
mitigate the risk
I tell you what there there is there's a
dollar in that and there's a lot of
people out there doing it entire
consulting firms exists
for that purpose
for for little more than telling people
about the risks of the future and how
bad things are going to get give me a
few dollars and I will forecast it let's
I'm sorry to say this is fortune telling
this is modern corporate fortune telling
that's what's going on here
they can have graphs and statistics all
day long
but as soon as they start making
forecasts about the future it's prophecy
it doesn't matter what the facts of
today are we can all agree on those
but just because you are in possession
of a particular set of facts that you've
looked up you've gone to the trouble of
looking up Wikipedia or whatever to find
out how many destroyers are in the U.S
Navy let's say
and you call yourself a global
strategist
this does not give you any greater
insight into what's going to happen 30
years from now because you don't know
what scientific discovery is much less
any other Discovery is going to be made
in those next few decades
no one does
but I tell you what if if human
civilization is anything to go by then
whatever the problems of the future will
be solved and we will encounter problems
of the future and we will solve them
creating new knowledge which makes the
place a heck of a lot better than what
it is now unimaginably so
just as we stand in relation to the
people of the 1930s and the people of
the 1930s stand in relation to the
people of the 1230s
this is the kind of difference we should
expect over the coming decades a
continual ramping up of progress and
innovation in ways we cannot possibly
foresee today but which is going to make
everything a lot better
by all of our lives but we'll still have
the pessimist then I guess
about is that we're going to win the
argument
but hi
um I I suppose it it keeps if it keeps
them in business okay if they're you
know if the if the pessimists are being
uh kept in good employee by telling us
about how badly things are going and you
know some of us can earn a fraction of
the amount by telling you why it is that
they're wrong
and they are wrong they are wrong
they're absolutely wrong
okay let's keep going
he is the author of The Accidental
superpower the absent superpower
disunited Nations and most recently the
end of the world is just the beginning
The Accidental superpower so I'd say I
haven't read these books okay but it
just sounds you know anti-American as I
say
um this United Nations yeah yeah for
sure if it's about the United Nations
who wants the United Nations who wants
that anti-democratic institution I
suppose it serves a purpose where it
serves a good purpose it's open to
question okay let's keep going Ian
bremmer is President and founder of
Eurasia group a leading Global Research
and consulting firm
and G zero media a company dedicated to
providing intelligence and engaging
coverage of international affairs
he currently teaches at Columbia
University School of International and
public affairs and he has published 10
books including the New York Times
bestseller Us Versus Them the failure of
globalism
and his most recent book is the power of
Crisis how three threats and our
response will change the world
Ian is also a foreign affairs columnist
and editor at large for Time Magazine
apologies for some of the audio
especially on Peter's side Peter's in
the middle of a book tour and we were
unable to send him the gear we usually
send to guests so it sounds more like a
phone call on his end but his words are
clear enough
and I bring you Peter Zion and Ian
bremmer
I am here with Peter Zion and Ian
bremmer Peter Ian thanks for joining me
it's great to be here good to be with
you guys
Peter the occasion for this conversation
is your fairly astounding new book the
title of which is the end of the world
is just the beginning
uh which I read last week and um I knew
I wanted to speak with you I also knew
that I am not uh entirely qualified to
absorb every aspect of your thesis I
mean you cover
so many topics which are really not my
wheelhouse things like geography and
Manufacturing and Agriculture and
Industrial materials Etc so I I invited
Ian on really to kind of co-pilot the
plane with me here and be a backstop
against some of my ignorance about these
matters and Ian is a a frequent guest on
the podcast so uh it's great to talk to
you both I think before I mean I'll just
see I'd like you to roll out your thesis
as you presented in the book at kind of
a high level at the beginning here I
guess I'll just kick you off
so yeah part of the I haven't read the
book okay I've listened to the podcast I
haven't read the book so you know
maybe my entire philosophy about how
civilization works could be undone by
his book
I doubt it but but there's certainly as
Sam indicates there's something about
you know manufacturing and resources and
that kind of thing
you know and changes which Peter seems
to think indicate a trend towards things
becoming worse off or us all becoming
worse off
remember the parable of europium from
the beginning of infinity
you know this whole idea that it was
thought that the number of color screens
was limited because one of the pixels in
colored screens in cathode ray tubes was
red and red contained europium and the
amount of europium on planet Earth was
limited therefore the number of colored
screens would be limited mathematically
provable
it seems like the arguments might be
like that right you you've got this
resource so you've got this way of
manufacturing and it's you know there's
a there's an end point to it and
therefore things are going to go bad
when we reach the end of that particular
resource or when we reach the end of
that particular way of doing things
not thinking that people are creative
and so we come up with a new resource
this is why I say resources are infinite
any given resource on you know finite
spaces of course limited on Earth
there's a certain amount of europium on
Earth there's a certain amount of matter
by definition it's the Earth okay it's
no bigger than the earth it's the Earth
but the universe is not so limited
people are already talking about mining
asteroids but never mind that
we can learn new ways of repurposing
matter
and coming to understand matter in
better ways that what we thought wasn't
a resource becomes a resource simply by
learning new ways of using it this is
what nuclear physics is about right
among other things and if there's a way
of doing things that seems to be
unsustainable or use whatever word you
like it's not like we won't come up with
a new way of doing stuff
if Constructor Theory works out we'll
have the universal Constructor and what
we're building absolutely anything using
the you know the generalization of the
3D printer and these devices will be in
homes and things will be radically
different radically transformed and
radically for the better
we've talked about this you know go all
in with Constructor Theory rather than
with the pessimists and see where your
imagination leaves you then
with pessimism you're left with a wall
that Civilization declines the point of
becoming extinct something like
construct a theory
which has the implication of a universal
Constructor
which can be created and and will be
created in some timeline perhaps hours
then you have a civilization that is
unbounded that only continues to get
better and this is why we say
that all we have to do is try harder
make the right choices create the right
knowledge things get better all right
let's keep going
by reminding you that one of the more
provocative and unequivocal things you
say in the book
among many provocative and unequivocal
things is that quote the world of the
past few decades is the best the world
is ever going to be in our lifetime
[Laughter]
unequivocal maybe this this is what
one needs to do as a prophet
and a prophet tends towards pessimism
you have to be more and more unequivocal
you have to be less and less a
fallibilist these things are all tied
together
the
desire to predict the far distant future
where knowledge is absolutely going to
have an impact where the creativity of
people is going to have an impact which
we don't call prediction we call
prophecy for a reason
ignoring possible solutions because they
can't be imagined now therefore tending
in the direction of pessimism
requires one to also be at absolutely
certain but they're not wrong
to deny the possibility of fallibalism
or at least to downplay it maybe to
intellectually give it a check off I
could be wrong about this however all
the signs are that I'm not something
like that
so I'll just I'll rewind a little bit
and then we'll keep going because uh I'm
interrupting at a crucial point you know
Sam's summarizing how you know we
this is the best the world is ever gonna
get how many times has that been said
that that is the history of pessimism
for the last few centuries people are
the problem not the solution
that we live in an especially dangerous
time things are only going to get worse
it just every generation comes up with
their intellectuals that they hold up as
he is the guy usually the guy here's the
guy that is telling you that
everything's going to go wrong
enjoy it while you can because it's all
about the fall apart the malthusians of
the world and Thomas Malthus it was
wrong in the 1700s
every one of his intellectual successes
has been wrong ever since
he had graphs and mathematical proofs as
they do now he had lots of data as they
do now they're always wrong they are
always wrong because they cannot imagine
the explanations yet to be generated
to create the solutions yet to be found
and the Technologies to make everything
better but that's what inevitably
happens that's the fundamental deep law
of epistemology and and and what is
governing
what is governing the way in which
civilization is behaving
we error correct when we encounter the
problem we find the solution when we
identify the error we solve it we we
correct it we make things better that's
what the people are unique we're unique
okay let's keep going is that quote the
world of the past few decades is the
best the world is ever going to be in
our lifetime and so basically your claim
that Services throughout the book is
that the world as we have known it ended
more or less in 2019 and there is no
going back
and globally speaking more or less
everything that matters is going to get
worse
and it's going to be worse for the rest
of our lives whether as we'll hear that
you posit that they'll be the islands of
relative advantage and America is going
to do much better than China for
instance
what to say I mean how can you know
based upon any set of facts today
whatever the set of facts are today
I could imagine a set of facts about the
real world today that are worse than
what the real world is now I can imagine
the state of the world right now being
worse than what it is and yet still
thinking that things will get better
and yet somehow This Magnificent world
that we do have
problems though we do have admittedly
problems though we do have is not in a
worse place than things were
in the Second World War
and yet from the second world war
through to today things have gotten
better continually better at an
accelerating rate
the starting point of the second world
war is way worse right
now we're so we're so far ahead of that
and somehow being so far ahead of that
terrible tragedy and that terrible
starting point is all signs point to
decline
no precisely the opposite
however much money you were going to
place on the bet that things were going
to get better at the conclusion 1940 you
know 1945 at the conclusion of the
second World War
whatever money you would have put on
things getting better then you should be
putting a million times more money on
things getting better right now
it's a far better bet to say things are
going to get better over the next 50
years now than it would have been back
in the 40s
and yet things did get better in the 40s
in the 80s
you know the early 80s late 70s early
80s the middle of the Cold War
again all signs seem to suggest well
according to some intellectuals anyway
nuclear winter was coming because the
bombs were about to start flying between
the USSR and the United States
and everyone else in the world will be
caught in the crossfire
it would be the end of the world as we
knew it
in a bad way
and yet the Berlin Wall fell there was
the the the the the entire Iron Curtain
fell you know the USSR collapsed things
got better A lot better
and continue to get better
and yet now
we've got the rise of China okay
um possibly better than what the USSR
was possibly better I mean at least you
know China does have a strong capitalist
bent in some ways certainly not
capitalist but I mean look at Shanghai
look at Beijing I mean to look at it
it's not the gray concrete of the
typical socialist country they
understand that free markets do
something and the people there
understand that life can be better
and with the information age they know a
lot more now how much longer will they
tolerate this totalitarian government
don't know
could things get worse in the meantime
yeah but I think they'll get better
ultimately
the proximate set of circumstances might
be
decline
but the ultimate set of circumstances
for China and the Chinese people will be
better
so you to say that right now is the best
that life is ever going to be
is absolute prophecy
it is created for a market that exists
right now where people want to hear
about how everything's going to go to
rack and Ron I don't know precisely why
I don't have an answer for that I have
said that it's got something perhaps to
do with our impulse to see disaster
movies but I can't explain it all that's
just a frivolous line I sometimes say
you know we like to go and see Deep
Impact we like to go and see you know
the the movies about uh the aliens
coming and wiping out human civilization
or the asteroid coming or the the the
big volcano going off we like to watch
movies like that it's entertaining so we
like to listen to podcasts like this as
well about how everything's going to get
worse it's exhilarating
people like that it tickles them in a
certain way you know if you get a little
bit depressed a little bit anxious or
worried concerned
perhaps to feel a little bit
intellectual too to be able to go out to
your friends and family and talk about
this stuff about how I listen to Sam
Harris talk about how you know
everything's going to get really really
bad and uh Joe Rogan picks up on it and
you know comedians like Tim Dylan Like a
a big comedy and a love listening to Tim
Dillon because he takes it to the
extreme
I I like a comedian dealing with this
kind of stuff
because I think that's the best way
for it to be traded at times
because it's so extreme some of the
claims are so extreme like this
how can this how can one not laugh at
this how can I not see that it's just
the latest in a long tradition of
precisely this kind of claim being made
that it's absolutely certain that you
live at the best point in human history
as I say Malthus was saying this in
1730s
predicting that the world would be out
of food by the early 1900s and instead
the exact opposite happened
more people than ever have been lifted
out of poverty and famine
and that will continue a pace
that your standard of living today
the standard of living of the typical
millionaire living on the west coast of
the United States
will seem as if to be the most
poverty-stricken person imaginable
in the 2200
in the year 2200
they will be looking back at the year
2022 and thinking how do those people
tolerate living like that
with a life expectancy of only 80
something years old
only having you know an income of six
figures five figures six figures each
year how could they tolerate that how
did they get by
vehicles that were you know private
vehicles that they had to drive you know
it would seem like the horse and cart
right you know you know all we have to
do is to hop into this vehicle and it
takes us wherever we go at the Press of
a button wires
name name the thing that will seem
ridiculous to people in the year 2020
2200 and yet if intellectuals today of
2022 are to be believed the year 2200 is
going to be a terrible hellscape an
apocalyptic nightmare of starvation and
poverty it's not it's not
why not because I'm making a prediction
about specifics I'm saying this is what
civilization does this is the way in
which knowledge is created what happens
is people identify errors problems then
solve them this is what we do now unless
we all cease to exist okay then the
world will go into decline what does
decline mean in a world without people
but as long as people are here we use
the background knowledge that we have
and improve upon it improve improve by
finding the deficiencies in it
and once we do that then not only does
that knowledge get better but everything
that our knowledge creates in the world
the physical stuff the artifacts the
technology also gets better solving
literal problems like disease and how to
grow more food and produce more stuff
and just make everything more
comfortable and better
and fly to the Stars
let's get going
but basically the sky really is falling
on your account so I would I'd love you
just to jump in and give us a first pass
at this argument
of course so let's start at the
beginning before World War II global
trade in the way that we think of it
today did not exist there was no
manufacturer's trade certainly not
supply chains energy and agriculture
tended to be kept in the house you if
you wanted something you went out you
took it colonized it you expanded into
Empire and those Empires clashed those
clashes brought us the destruction of
the world wars and the end of the
Imperial era
at the end of that conflict the
Americans proposed a new way of
functioning instead of everyone having
to have their own sequestered protected
militarized Convoy systems the U.S would
use its Navy which was the only one of
size to survive the war and would
protect everyone's Commerce everywhere
at any time no matter who you wanted to
partner with where you wanted to go
where you wanted to sell
this is a bizarre reading of history
that there wasn't global trade before
this what was the Dutch East India
Company what were the British doing
prior to the second world war in the
first world war for that matter
they were globally trading absolutely
the Chinese were globally trading for
goodness sake
technology increased and sure there was
a an uptick in the amount of global
trading but this denial of the existence
of global trade before this I don't
understand I guess I have to read his
book to see where it's coming from
but there has been by his own admission
there an improvement in things even if
we were to Grant the idea that after the
second World War something particularly
special happened when it came to global
trade well that's that's an admission of
improvement that things have improved
since then
and
for some reason we should expect that
this is going to come to an end this
global trade that has served us so well
that Any Nation can see as far superior
to as one might say simply going out and
taking the stuff insofar as that happens
because again it depends upon the way in
which one wants to read history and of
course there are these history walls
that go on is it really the case that
the conquistadors were simply stealing
stuff is that really what was going on
was their trade
was it a kind of trade
the Incas still exist as modern-day
bolivians and peruvians
was there trade that went on then
well that's a good guy if in exchange
you would serve as Ken and fodder in the
Cold War
we bribed up an alliance and it worked
but the cold war ended 30 years ago and
we've been backing away ever since and
in every presidential election we have
gone with the more populous candidate
and I would not exclude Biden from that
statement
this is a particular way of reading
history it has a very particular spin
a very kind of anti-American idea
this idea that they're going with the
populist candidate Trump was the
populist uh Biden was the populist
what's the alternative what does
populist mean
Douglas Murray's made this point does it
just mean popular
yeah so it again it hints at this idea
that oh these the mob out there the
demos the the citizenry they're making
the wrong decision how dare they elect
the most popular candidate
or the person that is speaking to them
in some way
they should be electing the erudite
person now look I you know have my very
very few preferred politicians someone
like Daniel Hannan in the UK is in the
House of Lords now so
yeah not running for political office as
such but something like that would be a
better candidate by the metric of seems
to have a good understanding of history
and economics and so on and so forth a
rare
it would seem
America certainly made some interesting
choices over the recent years don't want
to get into politics
but
this reading of history as America in
decline in America stepping back they
are remain Far and Away the most
powerful military power in the world Far
and Away
the biggest economy most powerful
economy
the technological Hub of planet Earth
but I guess they also hold the title for
country most run down by their own
citizens their own citizens constantly
saying how terrible the place is and how
much in Decline it is people said it's
about Britain too they're always you
know running down Britain saying oh
Britain in Decline they used to be an
Empire and now they're into
Britain is more powerful today than it
ever has been
this idea that you know because flags
were planted on distant places somehow
made the nation more powerful than what
it is today is ridiculous it's a
technological powerhouse it's a
democratic Powerhouse it has more wealth
than it ever has before even when it had
access that we had Direct control over
those other territories let's get going
okay let's just go back because he
actually sits there about the United
States let's just hear that again I
would not exclude Biden from that
statement
we're done we're done we're done really
the United States has done ugh okay
at the time that the Ukraine war started
we actually had fewer troops stationed
abroad than at any time since
reconstruction isn't that good
isn't that good
to have fewer troops stationed around
the world than at any time before that
doesn't that indicate that the world is
becoming more peaceful not requiring
such a proliferation of American
military power to be in different places
America's got a base in Seoul in South
Korea why because you know in case of
North Korea's attack
there's still American troops based in
Germany but why
why to to prevent the Germans from doing
what they shouldn't do something like
that there's a historical there's a
historic leftover of troops there but
one can well understand why you would
reduce troop numbers in a place like
Germany hey you want to have a presence
there in Europe as the United States in
case of Russian aggression as we've seen
but there's a very good reason why
if you're the United States the
government of the United States and
parents of troops you would be saying
hey there's no reason for us to have
troops over there it's much more
peaceful now than it ever has been over
there we don't need the troops there
anymore
that's a good thing that's progress that
that is the
spreading of Peace around the world so
what he's saying in terms of decline we
can just counter that it's like this is
not evidence of decline this reduction
in troop numbers there's not an Evidence
of
military power decline on the part of
the United States it's an Evidence of
increased peace in the world
when military where foreign militaries
don't have to be at the border of the
skirmishes because the skirmishes are
stopped and people instead of Warring
with each other are trading with each
other
okay
so the American commitment to this sort
of structure which was always a security
structure for us is now gone second that
structure changed the way we live
in a pre-World War II pre-urbanized
pre-industrial system everyone lived on
the farm and kids were free labor so you
had a lot of them
but when globalization happened
urbanization happened and everyone took
those industrial and service jobs and
manufacturing jobs in the cities and
when you move into a condo kids are no
longer Free Labor they're just a really
expensive headache adults aren't
so we had fewer of them
this is this is this is what passes for
you know um the analysis of why people
are having less children fewer children
rather fewer
children of Free Labor
um we don't need the free labor anymore
um
people
are sources of plr creativity sources of
ideas
people have fewer children today because
they understand what it takes to care
for a child people care more about their
children
it just genuinely is I know it's an
unpopular opinion but you know you
certain civilizations care more about
the children than others certain
Generations care more about their
children than others going back a
thousand years people cared much less
about their children going back
Generations people cared less about
their children they would have more and
more
it would cost them more and more all the
children would live
have a worse standard of living because
you'd have 10 or 12 children you'd have
to look after much many more mouths to
feed less food to go around
you knew that not all of them were going
to survive
you clearly didn't care about them all
in the way that people care about their
children today people have less children
today because they they want their
children to have a good standard of
living better than what they have
and if you have three or two or even one
child you can really look after that
child so much better
than if you have 10 of them of course
you can spend more time with them this
is a good thing this is progress I've
got nothing against people having huge
families great some people maybe can you
know look after that number of children
and and give them you know eight
children
the same attention
mom and or dad is able to stay at home
great
often these days of course mum and or
Dad work
and so time is spread thin
to spend with the children so therefore
you know you have the one or the two or
the three
and the time you have is so much more
precious
the children are so much more precious
again looking at the same data the
completely opposite
implication can be drawn
not a sign of decline
a sign of progress an improvement
betterment for human civilization
forward that's 75 years and it's not
that we're running out of children that
happened 40 years ago it's that we're
running out of adults and we do not have
an economic theory for what a world
where the retirees outnumber the
children and the adults looks like no
but we'll we'll solve the problems as
they are encountered
trying to foresee the problem of the
distant future and come up with a
solution now
is a recipe for pessimism because you
can't imagine the solution now because
you don't know all the conditions for
the future
I've already mentioned Elon Musk but he
makes exactly the same mistake it
doesn't matter in the future if there
are more old people than young people
we don't have an economic model who
cares
economic models are very
not not of much use not of much use at
all in helping us to actually navigate
the Waters of how civilization can run
civilization is quite happy and the
economic model that's needed is free
trade capitalism
hands-off socialists just let the
government step away from the economy
this is the problem
that if you have people raising the red
flag and saying warning warning danger
that there's going to be many more old
people what do they want to do you know
what they want to do you know what they
want to do they want to increase taxes
they want to take control of your
personal finances they want to be able
to say look
this population catastrophe is coming
here's my graph that shows the number of
children is on the decline the number of
old people is on the increase therefore
we're going to have to take control of
the economy
don't worry we'll look after you like we
looked after you in covert
and when we're in charge we'll Dole out
the money
we'll we'll give welfare to the old
people now this is the wrong way of
thinking the right way of thinking is to
say oh people are productive imagine
that they have imaginations the same as
other other people I do not plan on
retiring thank you very much
for one I I if people are allowed to be
creative they can be creative through to
their dying day and maybe they won't
come a dying day because someone will
solve that problem
but this this pessimism about people
about old people is ridiculous and
unfounded and it creates
depression in people
to feel as if they're a burden on
society as if they have nothing left to
contribute
goodness
the people I admire most some of these
great scientists you know pushing into
their 70s 80s and 90s still contributing
look at Roger Penrose still going on
podcasts my goodness
why can't all older people be like that
in the limit
maybe we're going through the last
generation of old people who think who
think that what you're aiming for is
retirement what you're aiming for is to
do nothing in your final decades
what you're aiming for is
uh
not contributing older people now are
already on the internet and contributing
they're already being creative this is
changing already this this way of
thinking is I don't know it's stuck in
the 80s or something or before
that there's a concern that older people
are a burden no they're not no they're
not
then at the school the culture changes
maybe we'll be turning to older people
more and more to help educate the young
in a new way
a new mode of education and learning
that's not coercive and gives you a
direct line to the wisest most
knowledgeable people
wouldn't that be a good way to go okay
let's keep going
but we're about to live in that in the
naked now
good until now because as you age if
you're part of a global system if you
have a lot of people in their 40s and
50s you know people who have literally
been in their careers their whole lives
well they're very productive but they've
got to export that product in order to
make it work and in a globalized system
you can export from the more advanced
aged economies into the younger ones
but that only works until you hit Mass
retirement and at that point you don't
just have cons you don't only lack
consumption you also lack production and
investment Master time and exactly so
why is this concept of retirement even a
thing well it's because traditionally
people have been used as mules labor
physical labor
and yeah sure the human body gets to a
point where it can't do that labor
anymore it needs to retire it needs to
stop doing the heavy lifting the literal
heavy lifting
there are still jobs out there
absolutely that haven't been automated
yet but increasingly all of the heavy
lifting stuff the bricklaying the
driving the the Shelf stacking name your
thing where muscles need to be employed
every single day that's going to be
automated by robots
people are minds and in an economy in a
genuine knowledge economy a creative
economy which we're building the people
that the generation now know that
they're not aiming to become
shortstackers maybe for a few months or
years while they're making their way
through University or maybe while
they're trying to find their way in the
world they're aiming for a creative job
or in whatever way shape or form that is
they know that it's about using your
mind insofar as people are driving Ubers
now it's a means to an end on an end in
itself no one is aiming to be an Uber
driver for the rest of their life they
might be aiming to start a company that
is competing with Uber people know this
young people know this
this is the Next Generation the
generation of creatives
that won't want to retire
they want to make whatever the successes
of the successes of the successor of
tick tocks are in their 80s that's what
they'll be doing educating their
grandchildren about stuff
via a mode that we can't even imagine
now and being paid for it we are at the
beginning of an entirely new economy
where retirement won't be an issue it'll
still be an issue for a few decades
there will be a transition phase but
increasingly the popularity of this idea
of retirement will decline
that people will simply not want to if
they want if they want to have time off
they'll have time off in their 30s and
40s and 50s when they can go on holidays
and explore the world and do all that
sort of fun stuff while they still have
the youth and energy to do that and then
maybe later on if they haven't gotten
body replacement stuff and probably they
will okay this is what might happen in
the coming decades
that in those decades you know they're
the final decades let's say
maybe they won't be doing the physical
stuff but they'll still be doing the
creative stuff
hey what am I doing now this is not a
whole lot of effort am I going to unless
unless something really happens to the
the brain up here I can keep on doing
this or something like this something
Allied to this
into my 70s 80s 90s hundreds hundred and
tens 120s how much more so is that true
for people in there who are toddlers now
teens now early 20s now they're going to
be way better at knowing how to have fun
into their 70s 80s 90s hundreds and not
only have fun but getting paid to do it
and people will want to pay them lots of
money for doing whatever it is that
they're doing being creative teaching a
new generation of creative creators this
is stuck in the 80s at best
this whole analysis that that people
have one function and once they've
once they're unable to perform that
function anymore then they're nothing
but a burden is ridiculous
we don't have one function we don't have
one goal we can create new goals for
ourselves and older people today who've
just retired from let's say a lifetime
of driving trucks a lifetime of laying
bricks or whatever it happens to be
have access to technology now
at very low cost that enables them to
become a creator
the retired bricklayer can readily go
onto YouTube and share their knowledge
about how to lay bricks better
and earn you know thousands of views get
lots of followers from you know
home improvers
pip amateurs people at home who are who
are who are building their own house or
modifying their own house but don't know
how to bricklay yet but don't want to
employ a bricklayer but can go on
YouTube and look at someone who's got a
lot of experience in that for example
pulling something out of my ass
okay but you get my meaning
whatever the older person has done and
has just retired from can now become the
wise Elder teaching others about how to
do it better and then they can be
competing people competing bricklayers
saying hey he's my technique or here's
my technique you know and you can go on
YouTube and you can look at the
different techniques and you can assess
which is the better technique
or how to catwalk better
how to sing better
you know people people who might do it
in a funny way people who might do it in
an analytical way this is what's coming
never mind generation upon generation
upon generation of old people retiring
and becoming a burden on society
that's not what I foresee
but the idea that it it is going to
happen that way is pure prophecy
that things won't change that we
extrapolate from what's happened over
the last few decades off into the
infinite future absurd
absolutely absurd okay just a couple
more minutes you you get I think you get
the flavor of the episode and what I
would say as we go along
with particular facts that come out
and that is a position where the Chinese
the Japanese the Koreans the Italians
the belgians the Germans and more are
all edging into in the first half of
this decade
and there is no system that we are aware
of even theoretically where that works
so we are now at the end of what has
been the greatest period of economic
growth in human history
and now we get to figure out what's next
so that there are two so that's where
I'll end it we're at the end of the
greatest period of economic growth in
human history why are we at the end
because of what was just said about
retirees retirees are going to outnumber
young people for the first time we're
going to have this weird inverted
pyramid
now whether or not that actually happens
to be the case I don't know but as I say
people are becoming healthier and
wealthier and wiser in particular
healthier so they can work for longer
anyway that's that's one thing
but anyway as they become more and more
creative there is no upper limit on how
long they can continue to create for yes
there are things like dementia and
Alzheimer's which might cause a problem
but again that's also a problem that's
soluble and people will find solutions
to those things perhaps some of the old
people in retirement thinking about
these things will be the ones that solve
the problem of dementia and Alzheimer's
which would otherwise cause a whole
bunch of people who would otherwise be
creative preventing them from being
creative because their their brain has
declined in such a way but maybe also
one of the solutions to Alzheimer's and
Dementia will be people being creative I
don't know enough Neuroscience but I do
kind of know that for example if people
are isolated and not having
conversations they are more prone to
dementia their brain's not being engaged
and stuff and so therefore it declines
and you tend to have Alzheimer's and
Dementia showing up in situations where
people are isolated from their family
where they're not eating well where
they're not part of a community they're
not communicating but if we reverse that
all of that stuff we change that culture
and we have a globally connected
community of people
that are creative maybe Alzheimer's and
Dementia isn't cured but it begins
itself to decline it begins to recede
because we understand the causes
the cause of a human being perhaps a
human being being a person being
inherently creative
not engaging in creativity
could be the thing could be the
biological reaction of well if you're
not being sufficiently creative if
you're not being sufficiently creative
the brain just sort of shuts down
children are just unbounded in their
creativity and so their brain is so
active all the time and as we get older
maybe that that declines and that causes
this this this this horrible cycle this
reinforcement of um not being creative
brain decline wanting to be less
creative brain Decline and so on and so
forth maybe that will reverse that might
not be an actual an actual solution to
add to dementia let's say but it could
be a part of it and anyway
whatever the solution to any of these
things is is creativity so I think
that's where we'll um where we'll end it
today uh the the remainder of what I
hear are specifics facts about things
like the decline in you know or any
number of things the the US economy on
various metrics the US military on
various metrics and as if these are
pointing to some deeper decay in not
just the us but civilization more
broadly
it's it's certainly a pervasive idea
that America's in Decline
America is a force for kind of evil
people are stupid and voting the wrong
way
um enjoy it while you can because the
worst is yet to come it's it's it's yeah
as I started
laughing with this episode about just
how ridiculous it sounds in light of
what we understand about how knowledge
is produced what physics is telling us
what science is telling us what books
like the beginning of infinity and
thinkers like David Deutsch are telling
us about reality and how how why things
have gotten better and therefore why we
should con why we should think that
things are going to continue to get
better
because we people solve problems we
people create knowledge we people
correct errors and that's our nature
and that won't change and that will
continue to make things better
and I'm happy to take the bet
from anyone that over the next hundred
years or 100 years from now we'll look
back and see the 2022 was way way way
way worse good as it was way way way
worse
than the year 21 22 anyway
until next time bye-bye